---
layout: post
title: What I see in App.net
date: 2012-8-12 00:00:00 +01:00
---

I backed [app.net](http://app.net) from quite early, admittedly in part because I relish the opportunity to be an [early adopter](https://alpha.app.net/phuu) of anything, but in the main because I felt that the idea was important; necessary even. It felt like something big.

Dalton Caldwell, the mastermind of the app.net project wrote this about the idea in his [open letter to Mark Zuckerberg](http://daltoncaldwell.com/dear-mark-zuckerberg):
  
>I believe that a number of smaller, interoperable social platforms with a clear, sustainable business models will usurp you. These future companies will be valued at a small fraction of what Facebook and Twitter currently are. I think that is OK. Platforms are judged by the value generated by their ecosystem, not by the value the platforms directly capture.

Some have interpreted this to mean that app.net should be a [Diaspora](http://diasporaproject.org/)-style federated social network, allowing data to be distributed between silos. But I don't read it that way.

The way I see it, app.net is the first of (hopefully) many such API-driven services that interoperate because of their developer communities. We know one or two monoliths in the space is not good for anyone, particularly when the end product becomes the user, and not the service. Without mentioning any names, Twitter and Facebook. Oops.

Choice and competition in any market or economic space is known to be beneficial and hope that in a few years time we see a choice of social media platforms, each with different strengths, that interoperate in a way that benefits the end user and empowers the developers. And with Twitter, the could-have-been real-time API of the web, booting up a corporate feel, I think this is very important.

In app.net, I see the beginnings of a bright future for the social web, built on high-quality platforms where a user has a choice and where developers can built as yet unimagined tools, services and products.

When the service becomes the product, great avenues of opportunity open.